---
layout: image-right
---

# Observability

Observability, in the context of computer systems and software engineering, refers to the ability to gain insights into the internal workings of a system by collecting, analyzing, and visualizing relevant data and metrics. It is a crucial concept in understanding and troubleshooting complex distributed systems, including cloud-based applications, microservices architectures, and other highly dynamic environments.

---

Observability is often used as a measure of how well developers and operators can understand what is happening inside a system, especially during production or real-world usage. It involves monitoring various aspects of the system, such as performance metrics, logs, traces, and other signals, to gain a comprehensive understanding of its behavior and health.

Key aspects of observability include:

1. Monitoring: the continuous collection of metrics and logs from the system's components. Monitoring provides real-time or near-real-time insights into the system's performance, availability, and other critical indicators.
1. Logging: capturing and recording events, errors, and other relevant information generated by the system during its operation. Logs are invaluable for investigating issues, debugging, and auditing system behavior.
1. Tracing: enables operators to follow the path of a single request as it flows through various components of a distributed system. This is especially important in microservices architectures, where a single request might involve multiple services.
1. Metrics: quantitative measurements of the system's performance and behavior. Common metrics include response times, error rates, request throughput, and resource utilization. These metrics help identify performance bottlenecks and trends over time.
1. Alerting: the ability to identify and notify teams about critical issues or abnormal behavior. When certain thresholds are exceeded, alerts trigger, prompting teams to take immediate action.
1. Dashboards and visualizations: used to present the collected data in a meaningful and easily digestible format. This enables stakeholders to quickly grasp the system's health and performance status.

The goal of observability is to reduce the Mean Time to Detect (MTTD) and the Mean Time to Repair (MTTR) for issues that may arise in a system. By having comprehensive visibility into the system's behavior, developers and operators can proactively identify and address potential problems, leading to more reliable, performant, and maintainable software systems.

